In addition to an existing installed capacity[a] of 1.3 Gigawatts (GW) of hydro-electric schemes, Scotland has an estimated potential of 36.5 GW of wind and 7.5 GW of tidal power, 25% of the estimated total capacity for the European Union and up to 14 GW of wave power potential, 10% of EU capacity.
Scotland exceeded its renewable energy target, set in 2007, for 31% of total power generation coming from renewables by 2011, and the 2020 target for the renewable share of total electricity generation has been raised from 50% to 100%.
In January 2006 the total installed electrical generating capacity from all forms of renewable energy was less than 2 GW, about a fifth of the total electrical production.
In 2011, around 35 per cent of Scotland’s electricity came from renewable energy, exceeding the Scottish Government’s target of 31 per cent, and Scotland contributed almost 40 per cent of the UK’s renewables output.
There are now numerous large on-shore power stations including Black Law Wind Farm rated at over 96 MW, Hadyard Hill Wind Farm, which is the first wind farm in the UK able to generate over 100 MW, and Whitelee Wind Farm, a 322 MW project that was the largest onshore wind farm in Europe, but has been superseded by the Clyde Wind Farm.
The funding is part of a new £13 million funding package for marine power projects in Scotland that will also support developments to Aquamarine's Oyster and Ocean Power Technologies' PowerBuoy wave systems, AWS Ocean Energy's sub-sea wave devices, ScotRenewables' 1.2 MW floating rotor device, Cleantechcom's tidal surge plans for the Churchill barriers between various Orkney islands, the Open Hydro tidal ring turbines, and further developments to the Wavegen system proposed for Lewis as well as a further £2.5 million for the European Marine Energy Centre (EMEC) based in Orkney.
Other renewable options Various other ideas for renewable energy in the early stages of development, such as ocean thermal energy conversion, deep lake water cooling, and blue energy, have received little attention in Scotland, presumably because the potential is so significant for less speculative technologies.
Their effect is likely to influence the future direction of commercial renewable energy, but they are not renewable forms of energy production themselves.
There is clearly a significant difference between a renewable energy production facility of modest size providing an island community with all its energy needs, and an industrial scale power station in the same location that is designed to export power to far distant urban locations.
The Forum for Renewable Energy Development in Scotland, (FREDS) is a partnership between industry, academia and Government aimed at enabling Scotland to capitalise on its renewable energy resource.
Community Energy Scotland provides advice, grant funding and finance for renewable energy projects developed by community groups.
