She was baptised in the Chapel Royal of Kensington Palace on 27 July 1867 by Charles Thomas Longley, Archbishop of Canterbury, and her three godparents were Queen Victoria, the Prince of Wales (later King Edward VII and May's future father-in-law), and Princess Augusta, the Duchess of Cambridge.
When her husband asked her to drop one of her two official names, Victoria Mary, she chose to be called Mary, preferring not to take the name of her husband's grandmother, Queen Victoria.
The Queen's relatives also abandoned their German titles, and adopted the British surname of Cambridge (derived from the Dukedom held by Queen Mary's British grandfather).
Children Mary of Teck Adolphus, Marquess of Cambridge Prince Francis of Teck Alexander, Earl of Athlone Children George, Marquess of Cambridge Mary Somerset, Duchess of Beaufort Lady Helena Gibbs Lord Frederick CambridgeGrandchildren Lady Mary Whitley Children Lady May Abel Smith Rupert Cambridge, Viscount Trematon Maurice of Teck Two months after the end of the war, Queen Mary's youngest son, John, died at the age of thirteen.
Queen Mary's eldest son, Edward, Prince of Wales, ascended the throne as Edward VIII.
She was now officially Queen Mother, though she did not use that title and was instead known as Her Majesty Queen Mary.
Simpson had been presented formally to both King George V and Queen Mary at court, but Mary later refused to meet her either in public or privately.
In 1952, King George VI died, the third of Queen Mary's children to predecease her; her eldest granddaughter, Princess Elizabeth, ascended the throne as Queen Elizabeth II.
The ocean liners RMS Queen Mary and RMS Queen Mary 2; the Royal Navy battlecruiser, HMS Queen Mary, which was destroyed at the Battle of Jutland in 1916; Queen Mary College, University of London; Queen Mary Hospital, Hong Kong; Queen Mary's Peak, the highest mountain in Tristan da Cunha; and Queen Mary Land in Antarctica are named in her honour.
A series of distinguished British actresses have portrayed Queen Mary on stage and screen, including Dame Wendy Hiller (on the London stage in Crown Matrimonial), Dame Flora Robson (in A King's Story), Dame Peggy Ashcroft (in Edward & Mrs Simpson), Phyllis Calvert (in The Woman He Loved), Gaye Brown (in All the King's Men), Dame Eileen Atkins (in Bertie and Elizabeth), Miranda Richardson (in The Lost Prince), Margaret Tyzack (in Wallis & Edward), Claire Bloom (in The King's Speech), and Judy Parfitt (in W.E.).
Titles, styles, honours and arms Titles and styles Honours Arms Queen Mary's arms were the royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom impaled with her family arms – the arms of her grandfather, Prince Adolphus, Duke of Cambridge (the royal arms used by the House of Hanover), in the 1st and 4th quarters, and the arms of her father, Prince Francis, Duke of Teck, in the 2nd and 3rd quarters.
