The original arcade version includes: The player loses a life if: These screens combine to form levels, which become progressively tougher.
The 22nd level is unofficially known as the kill screen, due to an error in the game's programming that kills Mario after a few seconds, effectively ending the game.
Graphical limitations forced his design: Drawing a mouth was too difficult, so the character was given a mustache; the programmers could not animate hair, so he got a cap; and to make his arm movements visible, he needed colored overalls.
When he specified that the game would have multiple stages, the four-man programming team complained that he was essentially asking them to make the game repeatedly.
In January 1983, the 1982 Arcade Awards gave it the Best Solitaire Videogame award and the Certificate of Merit as runner-up for Coin-Op Game of the Year.
The game was ported to Nintendo's Family Computer (Famicom) console in 1983 as one of the system's three launch titles; the same version was a launch title for the Famicom's North American version, the Nintendo Entertainment System (NES).
The original arcade version of the game appears in the Nintendo 64 game Donkey Kong 64.
This version is based on the NES version and reinstates the cement factory level, as well as some intermission animations that were not included in its original port.
Landon Dyer, the programmer assigned to create the port added a secret where his initials would appear if the player died under certain conditions then waited for the game to cycle to the title screen.
After this announcement, the steps required to trigger the Easter egg were discovered by Don Hodges who used an emulator and a debugger to trace through the 25,000 lines of the game's code.
Legacy Donkey Kong spawned the sequels Donkey Kong Jr. and Donkey Kong 3, as well as the spin-off Mario Bros. A complete re-make of the original arcade game on the Game Boy, named Donkey Kong or Donkey Kong '94 contained levels from both the original Donkey Kong and Donkey Kong Jr arcades.
It starts with the same damsel-in-distress premise and four basic locations as the arcade game and then progresses to 97 additional puzzle-based levels.
It was the first game to have built-in enhancement for the Super Game Boy accessory.
It was originally developed as a GameCube game and would have used the bongo controller, but it was delayed and released exclusively as a Wii title with no support for the bongo accessory.
