By comparison, Fort Stanwix in New York, begun in 1758 in a then-modern star fort style, cost ₤60,000 to erect, while the construction of Fort Prince George in South Carolina cost that province's House of Commons ₤3,000.
Dobbs likely had a role in designing the fort, as he had designed at least one other fort in North Carolina, as well as a number of structures in Ireland.
In 1756, Dobbs also approved the construction of another fort, this time in lands claimed by the Catawba, as well as both Carolinas, near modern-day Fort Mill, South Carolina.
Workmen under Waddell's command began construction in 1756, but in 1757, Catawba leaders, influenced by South Carolina Governor William Lyttelton, informed North Carolina's government that they no longer wished for this second fort to be built, and construction of the second fort was permanently halted.
Decline and fall of Anglo-Cherokee relations During the Anglo-Cherokee War, which occurred during the later years of the French and Indian War, the fort served as the base for North Carolina militia tasked with repelling Cherokee raids in the western portion of the province when hostilities broke out between that tribe and the British provinces in 1758.
Waddell described the action in an official report to the Governor on February 29, 1760: At around the same time as this attack occurred, Cherokee war parties attacked Fort Loudoun, Fort Prince George, and Ninety-Six, South Carolina.
The engagement at Fort Dobbs and settlements in the North Carolina Piedmont led the government of North Carolina to join South Carolina and Virginia in their campaign against the Cherokee in their own settlements in North and South Carolina, known as the "Middle" and "Lower Towns".
That same year, the owners of the parcel of land on which the Fort Dobbs site was located donated 1,000 square feet (93 m2) containing the fort's remains to the Fort Dobbs Chapter.
Historic site The State of North Carolina maintains and operates the area as Fort Dobbs State Historic Site.
In 2010, the Friends of Fort Dobbs pledged $500,000 to the North Carolina Historic Sites program for the reconstruction of the fort.
