The other three species are the Lovely Fairywren (M. amabilis) of Cape York, the Variegated Fairywren (M. lamberti) found across most of the continent, and the Blue-breasted Fairywren (M. pulcherrimus) of southern Western Australia and the Eyre Peninsula.
Molecular study showed the Blue-breasted Fairywren to be the most closely related to the Red-winged Fairywren.
Like other fairywrens, the Red-winged Fairywren is unrelated to the true wrens.
Southwestern birds gave rise to what is now the Red-winged Fairywren, while those in the northwest of the continent became the Variegated Fairywren.
Like other fairywrens, the Red-winged Fairywren is notable for its marked sexual dimorphism, males adopting a highly visible breeding plumage of brilliant iridescent blue and chestnut contrasting with black and grey-brown.
Lifespan Survival of fairywrens from one season to the next is generally high for such small birds, and the Red-winged Fairywren has the highest rate of all—with 78% of breeding males and 77% of breeding females surviving from year to year.
It borders the range of the Variegated Fairywren on the northern limit of its range, and the Blue-breasted Fairywren in the eastern limit, with the latter two species occupying dryer scrub while the Red-winged Fairywren is restricted to wetter forests.
The Red-winged Fairywren is a cooperative breeding species, with a pair or small group of birds maintaining and defending a territory year-round.
Groups range from two to nine members in size with an average of four birds, the largest for any fairywren studied to date.
Female helpers are much more common in this species than the other species intensively studied, the Superb Fairywren (M. cyaneus).
Like other species of fairy wrens, Red-winged Fairywrens may use a 'Rodent-run' display to distract predators from nests with young birds.
Observed in this species, the 'Wing-fluttering' display is seen in several situations: females responding, and presumably acquiescing, to male courtship displays, juveniles while begging for food, by helpers to older birds, and immature males to senior ones.
Courtship and breeding Like other fairywrens, male Red-winged Fairywrens have been observed carrying brightly coloured petals to display to females as part of a courtship ritual.
