Joseph said that "[Yanni] gave us musicians a great deal of freedom to expand the music as well.
Between tours, Joseph worked extensively in recording studios on music ranging from rock and pop to rhythm and blues and orchestration with numerous artists from RCA, Epic, Warner Brothers, and Polygram Records, in addition to performing in an elaborate national keyboard show tour with various musicians.
Ken Moore of the Naples Daily News cites, "Joseph's music is backed by 15 talented musicians, some playing three or more different instruments, that make up a symphony of sounds ranging from quietly pensive mood music to a rich orchestration of classical depth and breadth."
While I doubt fans of Liquid Mind or other mainly electronic new age music artists would wholly embrace the overt romanticism of piano-led tracks like 'Dancers Waltz' or 'Dreamer's Lullaby', there is definite appeal on the album for fans of adult contemporary piano pieces as well as for lovers of the more minimal approach to new age music."
Airlines such as Aeroméxico, AirTran, Frontier, JetBlue, and ExpressJet feature Joseph's music in their in-flight music programs.
Thoughts on success as an independent artist Having experienced both avenues of recording on a major label and later choosing to be an independent artist, a combination of musicianship with business know-how has helped give Joseph staying power in the notoriously competitive world of music.
Musical style and composition Joseph believes that "music allows a person to express their deepest thoughts, thoughts that cannot be expressed with just words."
Debbage comments, "One strength of Bradley Joseph as an artist has been his keen ability to write inspiring music with appropriately titled songs that express that thought non-verbally".
He explained to Janus that, "Through instrumental music, I’m allowed to come up with musical ideas that allow the listener to create their own impression of my song.
Joseph's musical style and direction have varied over time, having released more than two hundred original compositions and arrangements since 1994.
For the 2002 album One Deep Breath, Joseph combines "structured melodic pieces and free-form ambient compositions", which "departs dramatically from the previous more explosive and dynamic music on his first two recordings, Hear the Masses and Rapture".
Generally, Joseph's music gets airplay in the adult contemporary, smooth jazz, easy listening, and beautiful music radio formats, and while some is classified in the new age genre, he considers contemporary instrumental to fit his style of playing the best.
