Kidman, who also played guitar, and Thordendal decided to restore the name Meshuggah for the new band.
After replacing drummer Niklas Lundgren with Tomas Haake in 1990, Meshuggah signed a contract with German heavy metal record label Nuclear Blast and recorded its debut full-length album, Contradictions Collapse.
Thordendal's solo album Sol Niger Within was simultaneously released in the United States, and Meshuggah started to plan its next album at the end of the year.
Immediately after recording the album, Meshuggah went on a short US tour, and the album was released later in November 1998.
With this album, Meshuggah became the first band in the history of Nuclear Blast Records to crack the Billboard 200 and also became the first band signed to Nuclear Blast to be reviewed in Rolling Stone magazine.
The band then recorded and released the I EP, which contains a single, 21-minute track, released on Fractured Transmitter Records.
When Ibanez provided Meshuggah with special eight-string guitars with two extra-low strings that worked properly after the initial release, the band re-recorded the guitar parts for Nothing and re-released it in 2006.
The album was self-produced by the band and was recorded at the studio that Meshuggah shares with Clawfinger.
obZen With 2008's obZen, Meshuggah moved away from the experimentation of 2002's Nothing and 2005's Catch Thirtythree to return to the musical style of its previous albums, such as Contradictions Collapse, Destroy Erase Improve and Chaosphere, while still maintaining its focus on musical and technical innovation.
Official Meshuggah biography criticizes Chaosphere with: "Some fans felt that Meshuggah had left their dynamic and progressive elements behind; while others thought they were only progressing naturally and focusing on their original sound" and Nothing with: "[I]t displayed a very mature and convincing Meshuggah, now focusing on groove and sound...Meshuggah once again divided their fans into the 'ecstatic' and the 'slightly disappointed'".
Songwriting, recording and lyrics Meshuggah's music is written by Thordendal, Hagström and Haake with assistance from Kidman.
Although Meshuggah does not record concept albums, the band prefers strong conceptual underpinnings in the background.
