It comprises four main components: a thick inner torus of particles known as the "halo ring"; a relatively bright, exceptionally thin "main ring"; and two wide, thick and faint outer "gossamer rings", named after the moons of whose material they are composed: Amalthea and Thebe.
Main ring Appearance and structure The narrow and relatively thin main ring is the brightest part of Jupiter's ring system.
The inner boundary of the main ring, in contrast, appears to fade off slowly from 124 000 to 120 000 km, merging into the halo ring.
The dust produced in collisions retains approximately the same orbital elements as the parent bodies and slowly spirals in the direction of Jupiter forming the faint (in back-scattered light) innermost part of the main ring and halo ring.
Halo ring Appearance and structure The halo ring is the innermost and the vertically thickest Jovian ring.
Origin of the halo ring The optical properties of the halo ring can be explained by the hypothesis that it comprises only dust with particle sizes less than 15 μm.
The dust probably originates in the main ring, a claim supported by the fact that the halo’s optical depth is comparable with that of the dust in the main ring.
Gossamer rings Amalthea gossamer ring The Amalthea gossamer ring is a very faint structure with a rectangular cross section, stretching from the orbit of Amalthea at 182 000 km (2.54 RJ) to about 129 000 km (1.80 RJ).
Its inner boundary is not clearly defined because of the presence of the much brighter main ring and halo.
The outer boundary of the ring is relatively steep; the ring's brightness drops abruptly just inward of the orbit of Amalthea, although it may have a small extension beyond the orbit of the satellite ending near 4:3 resonance with Thebe.
In forward-scattered light the ring appears to be about 30 times fainter than the main ring.
The detection of the Amalthea gossamer ring from the ground, in Galileo images and the direct dust measurements have allowed the determination of the particle size distribution, which appears to follow the same power law as the dust in the main ring with q=2 ± 0.5.
Thebe gossamer ring The Thebe gossamer ring is the faintest Jovian ring.
Its inner boundary is not clearly defined because of the presence of the much brighter main ring and halo.
Origin of the gossamer rings The dust in the gossamer rings originates in essentially the same way as that in the main ring and halo.
