These five games are each 100% accurate simulations of the true sports, no other game has come so close to representing these sports.
The standard play mode mimics each game's respective method of play: tennis, a doubles match; baseball, a simple three-inning game of pitching and batting; bowling, a ten-pin, ten-frame game; golf, playing on a 3-hole or 9-hole golf course; and boxing, a three-round boxing match.
The multiplayer mode for Wii Sports usually has the players competing against each other in the normal manner of the specific sports; the one exception is tennis which allows for two players to play together or against each other.
Because Nintendo did not expect players to purchase the Wii solely to play Wii Sports, they bundled the game with the console; Nintendo believed players would be more likely to play Wii Sports through this distribution method.
Before the Electronic Entertainment Expo (E3) Media and Business Summit of 2006, the first sport in the game was announced as Wii Sports: Tennis.
The other sports titles were on display at E3 and shared a similar naming convention to the tennis game such as, Wii Sports: Baseball, Wii Sports: Golf, and Wii Sports: Airplane.
Davis criticized the oversimplified nature of the games, and GamePro stated that the separate games offered less depth than regular console sports games.
Nintendo Power listed Wii Sports along with its sequel Wii Sports Resort as two of the greatest multi-player experiences in Nintendo's history, stating that everyone from young children to grandparents can enjoy the games.
1UP.com listed it as the "Best Wii Game" and "Most Original Game" in their "Best of E3 2006" feature.
At the 2007 Interactive Achievement Awards, Wii Sports won "Outstanding Achievement in Game Play Engineering", "Outstanding Achievement in Game Design", and "Outstanding Innovation in Gaming".
At the 2007 British Academy Video Games Awards, Wii Sports won six out of seven award nominations: Sports, Innovation, Gameplay, Multiplayer, Casual, and Strategy and Simulation.
The New York Times named wii sports as the Game of the year, also The gaming website Gamasutra said that Wii sports was the most important game of 2006.
Impact Wii Sports, a major factor in the Wii's worldwide success, was the first release among a number of core Wii games being developed at the same time, with the same philosophy; others were released as Wii Play, Wii Fit, and Wii Music.
A direct sequel to Wii Sports, titled Wii Sports Resort, was released in 2009.
After the Wii's release, players began incurring injuries while playing Wii Sports, among other games, when they accidentally hit other players or objects while swinging the Wii Remote.
