History Britain's Got Talent Before her appearance on television, Smith had performed competitively in the Kettering, Northamptonshire Eisteddfod, the Llangollen International Musical Eisteddfod, the Pontins Junior Starquest competition and Festival 4 Stars.
Before the release of One Voice, it was revealed that Smith and her father, Tony Smith, were finalising the details of her record deal.
In November, it was announced that Smith would be performing on stage in Kettering with Sylvia Berryman, a vocal tutor who had worked with Smith prior to her appearance on Britain's Got Talent.
Smith said that she was "really looking forward to singing locally again", and it was again reported that Smith hoped to soon sign her own record deal.
Neil Fisher, writing for The Times, described Smith as "heir apparent" to Jenkins; the pair had first met when Smith won a competition at the Llangollen International Musical Eisteddfod.
Faryl Smith's first album, Faryl, was recorded at Air Studios, London, in December 2008, during Smith's Christmas holiday; it was completed on 3 January 2009 and features a 60-piece orchestra.
Other songs include Smith's version of "Amazing Grace", a cover of John Denver's "Annie's Song", and a version of "The Way Old Friends Do", rewritten for Smith by Björn Ulvaeus.
The success of the album left Smith the third Britain's Got Talent contestant to achieve a top ten album, after Potts (with One Chance) and Johnston (with One Voice).
Smith travelled back to the UK in early May, and, on 23 May, Faryl peaked at 31st place on Top Heatseekers Albums chart and at sixth place on the Classical Albums chart, remaining in the charts for one and 17 weeks respectively.
In February 2010, after the release of Smith's second album, Faryl was nominated for a Classical BRIT Award in the album category.
Wonderland In July 2009 it was announced that Smith was hoping to release her second album later in the year.
Smith claimed that Faryl "was an introduction to me and an introduction for me to recording", while Cohen, producer of both Faryl and Wonderland, said Smith had "matured as an artist since the first album and I have no doubt that once again, people will be astonished and moved by her performances".
However, the album failed to perform as well as Faryl, appearing on the top 75 of the UK Albums Chart for only one week, and peaked at 54th place.
