She was baptised in the Chapel Royal of Kensington Palace on 27 July 1867 by Charles Thomas Longley, Archbishop of Canterbury, and her three godparents were Queen Victoria, the Prince of Wales (later King Edward VII and May's future father-in-law), and Princess Augusta, the Duchess of Cambridge.
Albert Victor's brother, Prince George, Duke of York, now second in line to the throne, evidently became close to May during their shared period of mourning, and Queen Victoria still favoured May as a suitable candidate to marry a future king.
They had six children: Edward, Albert, Mary, Henry, George, and John.
Although the two were on friendly terms, Alexandra could be stubborn; she demanded precedence over Mary at the funeral of Edward VII, was slow in leaving Buckingham Palace, and kept some of the royal jewels that should have been passed to the new queen.
Two months after the end of the war, Queen Mary's youngest son, John, died at the age of thirteen.
In 1935, King George V and Queen Mary celebrated their silver jubilee, with celebrations taking place throughout the British Empire.
Queen Mary's eldest son, Edward, Prince of Wales, ascended the throne as Edward VIII.
Simpson had been presented formally to both King George V and Queen Mary at court, but Mary later refused to meet her either in public or privately.
She saw it as her duty to provide moral support for her second son, the reserved and stammering Prince Albert, Duke of York, who ascended the throne on Edward's abdication, taking the name George VI.
In 1952, King George VI died, the third of Queen Mary's children to predecease her; her eldest granddaughter, Princess Elizabeth, ascended the throne as Queen Elizabeth II.
A series of distinguished British actresses have portrayed Queen Mary on stage and screen, including Dame Wendy Hiller (on the London stage in Crown Matrimonial), Dame Flora Robson (in A King's Story), Dame Peggy Ashcroft (in Edward & Mrs Simpson), Phyllis Calvert (in The Woman He Loved), Gaye Brown (in All the King's Men), Dame Eileen Atkins (in Bertie and Elizabeth), Miranda Richardson (in The Lost Prince), Margaret Tyzack (in Wallis & Edward), Claire Bloom (in The King's Speech), and Judy Parfitt (in W.E.).
Queen Mary's arms were the royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom impaled with her family arms  the arms of her grandfather, Prince Adolphus, Duke of Cambridge (the royal arms used by the House of Hanover), in the 1st and 4th quarters, and the arms of her father, Prince Francis, Duke of Teck, in the 2nd and 3rd quarters.