In 1891, Joel Asaph Allen was the first to scientifically describe Transandinomys talamancae, when he named Oryzomys talamancae from a specimen from Talamanca, Costa Rica.
He placed both panamensis and carrikeri as synonyms of Oryzomys talamancae and mentioned O.
O. talamancae was the only member of its own species group, which Goldman regarded as closest to Oryzomys bombycinus (=Transandinomys bolivaris).
Musser and colleagues reviewed the group again in 1998 and confirmed that sylvaticus represents Oryzomys talamancae; however, they found that castaneus was in fact an example of Oryzomys bolivaris (the current Transandinomys bolivaris).
Oryzomys talamancae was also included; it appeared within "clade B", together with other species formerly associated with Oryzomys capito.
Later in the same year, he, together with Alexandre Percequillo and Robert Voss, named ten new genera for species previously placed in Oryzomys, including Transandinomys, which has Oryzomys talamancae (now Transandinomys talamancae) as its type species.
Several common names have been proposed for Transandinomys talamancae, including "Talamanca Rice Rat", "Transandean Oryzomys", and "Talamancan Rice Rat".
H. alfaroi, a widespread species ranging from Mexico to Ecuador, is also similar.
talamancae are similar in color to adult H.
In 2006, Weksler and colleagues noted tail coloration as a difference between the two species of Transandinomys (bicolored in T.
bolivaris), but in their 1998 study, Musser and colleagues could not find differences in tail coloration between their Panamanian samples of the two species.
talamancae follows the primitive pattern, as in most similar species but unlike in Hylaeamys.
The hypoflexid on the second lower molar, the main valley between the cusps, is very long, extending more than halfway across the tooth; in this trait, the species is again similar to T.
talamancae lacks the additional small roots that are present in various other oryzomyines, including species of Euryoryzomys, Nephelomys, and Handleyomys.
The distribution of Transandinomys talamancae extends from northwestern Costa Rica south and east to northern Venezuela and southwestern Ecuador, up to 1525 m (5000 ft) above sea level.
Transandinomys talamancae is a common, even abundant species.