The same year, Lord Penrhyn opened a new quarry at Caebraichycafn near Bethesda, which as Penrhyn Quarry would become the largest slate quarry in the world.
By 1792, this quarry was employing 500 men and producing 15,000 tons of slate per year.
The Nantlle Railway was built in 1828 and was operated using horse-power to carry slate from several slate quarries in the Nantlle Valley to the harbour at Caernarfon.
In 1843, the Padarn Railway become the first quarry railway to use steam locomotives, and the transport of slate by train rather than by ship was made easier when the London and North Western Railway built branches to connect Port Penrhyn and Port Dinorwic to the main line in 1852.
The Cardigan Railway was opened in 1873, partly to carry slate traffic, and enabled the Glogue quarry in Pembrokeshire to grow to employ 80 men.
Slate production in Wales peaked at over half a million tons in 1898, with 17,000 men employed in the industry.
In 1917, slate quarrying was declared a non-essential industry and a number of quarries were closed for the remainder of the war.
The demand for new houses after the end of the war brought back a measure of prosperity; in the slate mines of Blaenau Ffestiniog production was almost back to 1913 levels by 1927, but in the quarries the output was still well below the pre-war level.
There was an increase in demand for slate in the 1980s, and although this came too late for many quarries there was still some production in the Blaenau Ffestiniog area at the Oakeley, Llechwedd and Cwt-y-Bugail quarries, though the bulk of roofing slate production was at the Penrhyn Quarry.
Quarries still producing slate
The Penrhyn Quarry is still producing slate, though at a much reduced capacity from its heyday at the end of the 19th century.
It is currently owned and operated by Welsh Slate Ltd (a subsidiary of Lagan Building Solutions ), which also owns and carries out some operations at the Oakeley quarry at Blaenau Ffestiniog, the Pen yr Orsedd quarry in the Nantlle Vale, and the Cwt-y-Bugail quarry.
The Greaves Welsh Slate Company produces roofing slates and other slate products from Llechwedd, and work also continues at the Berwyn Quarry near Llangollen.
As well as many exhibits, it has the multi-media display To Steal a Mountain, showing the lives and work of the men who quarried slate here.