Ash resigned as rabbi in 1877, and in 1879, directors of Beth Hamedrash Hagadol proposed that a Chief Rabbi be hired for New York.
Beth Hamedrash Hagadol re-hired Ash to fill the vacant role of congregational rabbi at a salary of $25 per month (or $300today $7,000per year).
to promote Churches, Missions, and Sunday-schools in the City of New York." It built or supported Methodist churches primarily in poor areas, or areas that were being developed, including one in the building that would later house the First Roumanian-American congregation.
Ash died in 1887, and the United Hebrew Orthodox Congregations (now called The Association of American Orthodox Hebrew Congregations) began a search for a successor, to serve as rabbi of Beth Hamedrash Hagadol and as Chief Rabbi of New York City.
Although Rabinovitch received "massive support" from "leading east European rabbis", the congregation hired Jacob Joseph as the firstand what would turn out to be onlyChief Rabbi of New York City.
Beth Hamedrash Hagadol, the Eldridge Street Synagogue, and 13 other Lower East Side synagogues had raised $2,500 (today $65,000) towards the creation of a European style kehilla to oversee New York's Orthodox community, and had imported Joseph in an attempt to achieve that (ultimately unfulfilled) goal.
Though Joseph's appointment was, in part, intended to bring prestige to the downtown Orthodox congregations, his primary task as Chief Rabbi was to bring order and regulation to New York's chaotic kosher slaughtering industry.
During Joseph's tenure, Beth Hamedrash Hagadol helped found the Union of Orthodox Jewish Congregations of America (the "Orthodox Union").
In the spring of 1898, 50 lay officials from a number of Orthodox New York synagoguesincluding Congregation Ohab Zedek, the Eldridge Street Synagogue, Congregation Shearith Israel and Beth Hamedrash Hagadolconvened to create the organization.
After the war he founded a yeshiva for Jewish orphans in Italy, and then another religious school in Montreal, before moving to New York to take up the position of rabbi at Beth Hamedrash Hagadol.
The congregation's building was again threatened with demolition in 1967, but Oshry, possibly the first Lower East Side rabbi to recognize the value of landmark designation, was successful in having it designated a New York city landmark, thus saving it.
The New York Landmarks Conservancy's Endangered Buildings fund gave $2,500 for a temporary metal window, and assisted in getting approval from the Landmarks Preservation Commission for the work required to repair the damage, but the congregation did not have the $10,000 required to pay for it.