The Red-winged Fairywren was officially described by ornithologist John Gould in 1837, who derived the bird's specific name derived from the Latin term elegans 'elegant'.
Molecular study showed the Blue-breasted Fairywren to be the most closely related to the Red-winged Fairywren.
Southwestern birds gave rise to what is now the Red-winged Fairywren, while those in the northwest of the continent became the Variegated Fairywren.
Further warmer, humid conditions again allowed birds to spread southwards; this group, occupying central southern Australia east to the Eyre Peninsula, became the Blue-breasted Fairywren.
Like other fairywrens, the Red-winged Fairywren is notable for its marked sexual dimorphism, males adopting a highly visible breeding plumage of brilliant iridescent blue and chestnut contrasting with black and grey-brown.
The male in breeding plumage has a silvery blue crown, ear coverts and upper back, a black throat and nape, bright red-brown shoulders, a long grey-brown tail and wings, and greyish-white belly.
Vocal communication among Red-winged Fairywrens is used primarily for communication between birds in a social group and for advertising and defending a territory.
Survival of fairywrens from one season to the next is generally high for such small birds, and the Red-winged Fairywren has the highest rate of allwith 78% of breeding males and 77% of breeding females surviving from year to year.
It borders the range of the Variegated Fairywren on the northern limit of its range, and the Blue-breasted Fairywren in the eastern limit, with the latter two species occupying dryer scrub while the Red-winged Fairywren is restricted to wetter forests.
The Red-winged Fairywren is a cooperative breeding species, with a pair or small group of birds maintaining and defending a territory year-round.
Groups range from two to nine members in size with an average of four birds, the largest for any fairywren studied to date.
Though not directly studied, paired Red-winged Fairywrens are likely to be sexually promiscuous, with each partner mating with other individuals.
Like other species of fairy wrens, Red-winged Fairywrens may use a 'Rodent-run' display to distract predators from nests with young birds.
Observed in this species, the 'Wing-fluttering' display is seen in several situations: females responding, and presumably acquiescing, to male courtship displays, juveniles while begging for food, by helpers to older birds, and immature males to senior ones.
Like other fairywrens, male Red-winged Fairywrens have been observed carrying brightly coloured petals to display to females as part of a courtship ritual.